Docs/lsm 482 partial compile guidelines (#4823)
inmanta/inmanta-core: docs/resource_sets.rst

Constraints and rules
************************

> Some restrictions and guidelines were implemented to guarantee that partial compilations function properly:

Author: On the other hand, it might be easier to manage while the model is still small, then with each small change make sure to meet these constraints?

  As an example, to plan a daily full compile for 01:00 UTC, use the ``auto_full_compile`` environment setting:  ``0 1 * * *``.

TODO: mention this in the document's introduction?

Modeling guidelines
###################
This section will introduce some guidelines for developing models for use with the partial compilation feature. These present
a generic method that is safe to use with partial compiles. While diverging from these guidelines where they are overly
restrictive for your use case does not guarantee an incompatible model, it should always be done conciously and with extreme
care to respect the `Constraints and rules`_.

For simplicity, we will assume a model where each set of independent resources is ultimately defined by a single top-level
entity, which we will refer to as the "service" or "service entity" (as in ``LSM``). While the same concepts apply to the
use case where a set of independent resources is defined by more than one service entity, the guidelines currently do not
cover that use case.

TODO: check how trivial it would be to extend to the multi-service use case
TODO: "On a high level" -> remove?

> TODO: should I simplify and just talk about resources rather than generic nodes? Less accurate but also less abstract

Author: Still, this is a pretty big thing we'd be glancing over. I think that if I was reading documentation like this I'd like it to be covered. But perhaps I'm not the average end-user in that regard.

> TODO: should I simplify and just talk about resources rather than generic nodes? Less accurate but also less abstract

Reviewer: In any case, we should structure it to make the main point understood, then refine to the details

> On a high level, to allow safe use of partial compiles, it is imperative that each service's refinements (through

Author: Like the ones below, just move it up? Or would you like something more generic, not tied to the example?

> On a high level, to allow safe use of partial compiles, it is imperative that each service's refinements (through

Reviewer: Moving it up might be sufficient, examples are good.

> On a high level, to allow safe use of partial compiles, it is imperative that each service's refinements (through
> implementations) form a tree that can only intersect between service instances on shared nodes. The whole subtree below such a
> shared node should be considered shared and any resources in it must not be part of a resource set. All shared resources should
> be consistent between any two service instances that might create the object (see `Constraints and rules`_). All other nodes
> should generally be considered owned by the service and all their resources be part of the service's resource set. For more
> details on what it means to own a a child node in the tree (e.g. a resource) and how to ensure two service instance's trees can
> not intersect on owned nodes, see the `Ownership`_ subsection.

Reviewer: Would it not be easier to explain from the notion of ownership?

```suggestion
On a high level, to allow safe use of partial compiles, each service must be the sole owner if its resources and shared resources must be identical across service instances. More precisely: each service's refinements (through
implementations) form a tree that can only intersect between service instances on shared nodes. The whole subtree below such a shared node should be considered shared and any resources in it must not be part of a resource set. All shared resources should be consistent between any two service instances that might create the object (see `Constraints and rules`_). All other nodes should generally be considered owned by the service and all their resources be part of the service's resource set. For more details on what it means to own a a child node in the tree (e.g. a resource) and how to ensure two service instance's trees can not intersect on owned nodes, see the `Ownership`_ subsection.
```

To ensure service instance definitions are distinct, the model must make sure to do appropriate validation on the full set of
definitions. When doing a partial compile, the model must verify that the service instance it is compiling for, has a different
identity from any of the previously defined service instances. This can be achieved by externally checking against some sort of
inventory that there are no matches for any set of input attributes that identify the instance.

The current implementation of partial compiles does not provide any helpers for this verification. It is the responsibility of
the model developer or the tool/extension that does the export to ensure that no two service instances can be created that are
considered to have the same identity by the model.

Ownership
*********
A resource can safely be considered owned by a service instance if it could never be created by another service instance. There
are two main mechanisms that can be used to provide this guarantee. One is the use of indexes on appropriate locations, the
other is the use of some external distributor of unique values (e.g. a plugin to generate a UUID or to allocate values in an
inventory).

> In either case, the goal is to make sure that any object that is marked as owned by a service instance, is unique to that

Reviewer: 1. The index here is in fact not required, the condition below it is sufficient:
`we do so by making sure the object's identity is in fact completely derived from the identity of the service instance` 
The index helps verifying this behavior when doing a full compile, but it not required.

2. completely derived is not sufficient, if we say `the name is the first character of the service id`, the name is completely derived from the service id, but not unique

3. the service id is not the only valid option: if the service instance has other unique (combinations of fields), that are provided as unique (see previous section), they can also serve to make unique id's 

(point 2 and 3 can be considered too precise to bother)

Author: 2. I did take that into account but I see how my wording is quite ambiguous in that respect. I'll pay special attention to this.
3. I don't think I ever mention "service id" directly (I've tried to explicitly avoid that). I mostly speak generically of "identity", which corresponds to what you're saying. I'll see if I can better define what I mean by that somewhere.

Author: 2. I tried to improve this a bit.
3. Added a definition of what the document means when it says "identity".

instance. In the index case we do so by making sure the object's identity is in fact completely derived from the identity of
the service instance. In the case where unique values are externally produced/allocated, responsibility for uniqueness falls
to the plugin that produces the values.

Generally, for every index on a set of attributes of an owned resource, at least one of the fields must be either derived from
the identity of the service instance, or allocated in a safe manner by a plugin as described above. The same goes for every

> pair of resource id and agent. If the former constraint is not met, a full compile might fail, while if the latter is not met,

Reviewer: simplified english is better 
```suggestion
pair of resource id and agent. If the first constraint is not met, a full compile might fail, while if the second is not met,
```

the export will be rejected because two services are trying to configure the same resources.

> For example, consider the example model from before. If two networks with two routers each would be created, they would result

Reviewer: This confuses me, because routers tend to connect networks, they can never be contained in them. (interfaces of routers can be in networks)

Author: I'll modify the example to use `Host` rather than `Router`.

            color = "grey";
            fontcolor = "grey";
            label = "Resource set for GoodService(id=0)";
            labelloc = "bottom";
        }
        label = "Owned by GoodService(id=0)";
        labelloc = "top";
        color="green";
    }
    subgraph cluster_service_good1 {
        "GoodService(id=1)" [shape=rectangle];
        "GoodService(id=1)" -> subgraph cluster_resources_good1 {
            "Resource(id=2)";
            "Resource(id=3)";
            color = "grey";
            fontcolor = "grey";
            label = "Resource set for GoodService(id=1)";
            labelloc = "bottom";
        }
        label = "Owned by GoodService(id=1)";
        labelloc = "top";
        color="green";
    }
    { "GoodService(id=0)" "GoodService(id=1)" } -> subgraph cluster_resources_good_shared {
        "SharedResource(id=0, value=0)";
        color="green";
        fontcolor="grey";
        label = "Shared and consistent among all service instances";
        labelloc = "bottom";
    }

    # force rendering on multiple ranks
    {"Resource(id=0)" "Resource(id=1)" "Resource(id=2)" "Resource(id=3)"} -> "SharedResource(id=0, value=0)" [style="invis"]

> .. digraph:: resource_sets_generic_bad

Reviewer: I would add the explanation of the bad one after the good one, this has a more natural flow.

Reviewer: It may also help to split both bad things into their own example

Author: Done

    # force rendering on multiple ranks
    {"Resource(id=4)" "Resource(id=5)"} -> {"SharedResource(id=1, value=0)" "SharedResource(id=1, value=1)"} [style="invis"]

TODO: clean up other graphs to look similar to this one

In conclusion, each service's refinements (through implementations) form a tree that may only intersect between service instances on
shared nodes. The whole subtree below such a shared node should be considered shared and any resources in it must not be part of
a resource set. All shared resources should be consistent between any two service instances that might create the object (see
`Constraints and rules`_). All other nodes should generally be considered owned by the service and all their resources be part
of the service's resource set. For more details on what it means to own a resource (or any child node in the tree) and how
to ensure two service instance's trees can not intersect on owned nodes, see the `Ownership`_ subsection.

Service instance uniqueness
***************************
With full compiles, indexes serve as the identity of a service instance in the model. The compiler then validates that no conflicting

> service instances can exist. With partial compiles this validation is lost because only one service instance will be present

Reviewer: ```suggestion
service instances exist. With partial compiles this validation is lost because only one service instance will be present
```

Author: Done
